Switch statement (#463)
openqasm/openqasm: source/language/classical.rst

The statement ``end;`` immediately terminates the program, no matter what scope
it is called from.

The Switch statement

> --------------------

Reviewer: Nitpick: If looks like the heading level for the `switch` statement is incorrect. I assume the intention is to have it within the `Looping and branching` section, but instead it is a sibling.

On the other hand, the heading level for `Looping and branching` also seems odd -- it's currently inside `Low-level classical instructions` which makes it not findable in the table of contents on the left.

Perhaps `Looping and branching` should be moved up a level? I'm happy to make a separate PR for that if people like.

The statement ``end;`` immediately terminates the program, no matter what scope
it is called from.

The Switch statement
--------------------

A ``switch`` statement is a form of flow control that provides for a predicated selection of zero, one or more statements to be executed based on a discriminating controlling value. The discriminating controlling value can be either *explicit* - as it is the case for ``case`` statements - or *none of the above* - which is the case for ``default`` statements.

A ``switch`` statement is not a loop. It does not iterate over a sequence of values.

``switch`` statements may appear anywhere in a program where statements are allowed.

An OpenQASM3 ``switch`` statement shall use the following keywords:

- ``switch``

- ``case``

- ``default``

An OpenQASM3 ``switch`` statement shall be the following grammar:

- The ``switch`` keyword.

>    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- A right paren ``(`` literal.

>    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- A ``controlling expression``.

>    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- A left paren ``)`` literal.

>    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- A left brace ``{`` literal.

>    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- A sequence of one or more ``case`` statements (defined below).

>    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- Either zero or one ``default`` statement(s) (defined below).

>    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The statement ``end;`` immediately terminates the program, no matter what scope
it is called from.

The Switch statement
--------------------

> 

Reviewer 3: Can we please start the definition of the switch statement with a brief description of its functionality/purpose, ie.,  for `while` the equivalent is

> The statement while ( bool ) <body> executes program until the Boolean evaluates to false [[3]](https://github.com/openqasm/openqasm/blob/2ed64cbf4a5cb8ebe29fae11d8a4f0a82f8ca790/source/language/classical.rst#id11). Variables in the loop condition statement may be modified within the while loop body. The body can be either a single statement terminated by a semicolon, or a program block in curly braces {} of several statements:

Author: Done.

An OpenQASM3 ``switch`` statement shall use the following keywords:

>     - ``switch``

Reviewer 3: From this point on the list is rendering incorrectly. It may be due to an indentation error, [see](https://github.com/openqasm/openqasm/blob/2ed64cbf4a5cb8ebe29fae11d8a4f0a82f8ca790/source/language/classical.rst).

Author: Done.

    - ``case``
    - ``default``
    - ``break``

> An OpenQASM3 ``switch`` statement shall be the following grammar:

Reviewer 3: This specification is much more comprehensive then the other classical control statements (in a good way).

      - the ``switch`` keyword

>       - a right paren '(' literal

Reviewer 3: Can we please use `(`, ie, `` markup for this and other similar instances below as this is consistent with the rest of the document?

      outside of a ``case`` or ``default`` statement are ill-formed.

	  A ``case`` or ``default`` statement may create brace-enclosed scope,
	  if such statements use the optional left and right brace literals.

	  ``case`` statements may create scope by using both left and
      right braces, or shall not use braces at all, in which case no
      scope is created.

	  ``default`` statements may create scope by using both left and
      right braces, or shall not use braces at all, in which case no
      scope is created.

	  A ``break`` statement shall be followed by a semicolon literal (;).
      ``break`` statements not followed by a semicolon literal shall raise
      an error diagnostic.

	  A ``break`` statement followed by a semicolon terminates the ``case``
      or ``default`` statement it belongs to.

	  Declarations at brace-enclosed ``case`` or ``default`` scope shall
      be in scope only within the scope of their brace enclosing ``case``
      or ``default`` statements, regardless of whether the enclosing
      statement contains a terminating ``break`` statement or not.

	  Declarations of types that automatically acquire global scope in

>       OpenQASM3 - such as gates, qubits and defcals - are not allowed

Reviewer 3: 👍

Author: Done.

      statement. After executing all the statements of the ``case`` or
      ``default`` statement, control flow is then transferred to the first
      statement following the closing right brace of the enclosing
      ``switch`` statement.

	  A ``case`` statement that does not contain a terminating ``break``
      statement followed by a semicolon transfers control to the
      statement immediately following it.

	  A ``default`` statement that does not contain a terminating ``break``
      statement followed by a semicolon transfers control outside the
      enclosing ``switch`` statement, to the first statement immediately
      following.

      This is sometimes referred to as "fall-through".

      The compiler shall issue a warning diagnostic for all fall-through
      ``case`` or ``default`` ``switch`` statements.

	  A ``switch`` statement shall contain at least one ``case`` statement.
      A ``switch`` statement with no ``case`` statements shall raise an
      error diagnostic.

	  A ``switch`` statement is not required to contain a ``default`` statement.
      In this case, the compiler shall issue a warning diagnostic.

  Examples:

> .. code-block::

Reviewer 3: In front of each example can we please add a short sentence describing what it is demonstrating?

Author: Yes it looks like my merge got all messed-up so I will have to re-format and re-submit this anyway.

The statement ``end;`` immediately terminates the program, no matter what scope
it is called from.

The Switch statement
--------------------

> A ``switch`` statement is a form of flow control that provides for a predicated selection of zero, one or more statements to be executed based on a discriminating controlling value. The discriminating controlling value can be either *explicit* - as it is the case for ``case`` statements - or *none of the above* - which is the case for ``default`` statements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A ``switch`` statement is a form of flow control that provides for a predicated selection of zero, one or more statements to be executed based on discriminating controlling values. The discriminating controlling values must be *explicit*, i.e. OpenQASM does not have the equivalent of a ``default`` statement found in some other languages.
```

A ``switch`` statement is not a loop. It does not iterate over a sequence of values.

``switch`` statements may appear anywhere in a program where statements are allowed.

An OpenQASM3 ``switch`` statement shall use the following keywords:

- ``switch``

- ``case``

> - ``default``
> 
> - ``break``
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> - ``default``
> 
> - ``break``
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> - ``break``
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

An OpenQASM3 ``switch`` statement shall be the following grammar:

- The ``switch`` keyword.
   
- A right paren ``(`` literal.
   
- A ``controlling expression``.
   
- A left paren ``)`` literal.
   
- A left brace ``{`` literal.
   
- A sequence of one or more ``case`` statements (defined below).
   

> - Either zero or one ``default`` statement(s) (defined below).
>    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

- A right brace ``}`` literal.
   

> The ``controlling expression`` of a ``switch`` statement shall be of integer type. Implicit conversions to an integer type are not allowed.

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to also allow bit array types in controlling expressions? i.e. so that one could have something like:
```
bit[3] r;
qubit[3] q;
for n in [0:2] {
   r[n] = measure q[n];
}
switch (r) {
   case "000":
   case "001":
      // ...
}

Author: It's no longer a `switch` statement. It's a collection of `for` loops inside a sequence of `if / else if / else` conditionals.

A `switch` statement is explicitly _not_ a loop.

The whole point of a `switch` statement is the construction of a LUT. That is, the `case` statement label value **_must_** be a known compile-time constant. If the controlling `case` label statement value is not a known compile-time constant, the compiler cannot construct a LUT. That defeats the entire purpose of the `switch` statement.

Also: `case` label values must be integer types, not strings.

Even if we considered the possibility of allowing `switch` on a `String` type, OpenQASM3 does not define what a `String` type is. That being the case, how can we `switch` on it?

The complexity of switching on strings is `O(N)` times number of `case` statements. The compiler will have to write a `strcmp(3C)` for every single `case` statement, and the complexity of `strcmp(3C) is `O(N)`. That's antithetic to the purpose of a `switch` statement.

- What happens in the case where the `string` case label value that's being switched on does not exist?
- How does the compiler check that all the possible `case` label statement values have been exhausted in the `switch` statement?

Reviewer 2: We discussed at TSC meeting today that we can address my usability concern with the following pattern:
```
bit[3] b;
switch (int(b)) {
   case 0b000:
      // ...
   case 0b001:
      // ...
}
```
i.e. write the literals for the cases using OpenQASM's syntax for binary integer literals.

Therefore, we decided to table the idea of extending the allowed types in the controlling statement to include bit arrays. It is something we can revisit in the future.

A ``case`` statement shall be the following grammar:

- The ``case`` keyword.

> - An ``integer-constant-expression`` controlling label.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An ``integer-constant-list-expression`` controlling label.
```

> - One semicolon literal (``:``).
> - An optional left-brace literal: ``{``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A left-brace literal: ``{``.
```

- A sequence of zero, one or more OpenQASM3 statements.

> - An optional right-brace literal: ``}``.
> - An optional ``break`` statement followed by a semicolon (``;``) literal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A right-brace literal: ``}``.
```

> A ``default`` statement shall be the following grammar:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``integer-constant-list-expression`` is a sequence of one or more integer constants separated by comma ``,`` literals.

A ``default`` statement shall be the following grammar:
```

> - An ``integer-constant-expression`` controlling label.
> - One semicolon literal (``:``).
> - An optional left-brace literal: ``{``.
> - A sequence of zero, one or more OpenQASM3 statements.
> - An optional right-brace literal: ``}``.
> - An optional ``break`` statement followed by a semicolon (``;``) literal.
> 
> A ``default`` statement shall be the following grammar:
> 
> - The ``default`` keyword.
> - One semicolon literal (``:``).
> - An optional left-brace literal: ``{``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An ``integer-constant-list-expression`` controlling label.
- A left-brace literal: ``{``.
- A sequence of zero, one or more OpenQASM3 statements.
- A right-brace literal: ``}``.
```

> - One semicolon literal (``:``).
> - An optional left-brace literal: ``{``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A left-brace literal: ``{``.
```

- A sequence of zero, one or more OpenQASM3 statements.

> - An optional right-brace literal: ``}``.
> - An optional ``break`` statement followed by a semicolon (``;``) literal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A right-brace literal: ``}``.
```

> - An ``integer-constant-expression`` controlling label.
> - One semicolon literal (``:``).
> - An optional left-brace literal: ``{``.
> - A sequence of zero, one or more OpenQASM3 statements.
> - An optional right-brace literal: ``}``.
> - An optional ``break`` statement followed by a semicolon (``;``) literal.
> 
> A ``default`` statement shall be the following grammar:
> 
> - The ``default`` keyword.
> - One semicolon literal (``:``).
> - An optional left-brace literal: ``{``.
> - A sequence of zero, one or more OpenQASM3 statements.
> - An optional right-brace literal: ``}``.
> - An optional ``break`` statement followed by a semicolon (``;``) literal.
> 
> A ``switch`` statement shall be in scope only within the scope where it is defined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An ``integer-constant-list-expression`` controlling label.
- A left-brace literal: ``{``.
- A sequence of zero, one or more OpenQASM3 statements.
- A right-brace literal: ``}``.
```

> The left and right braces of a ``switch`` statement shall not create brace-enclosed scope.

Reviewer 2: Why this behavior?

> Declarations or statements at ``switch`` statement scope but outside of a ``case`` or ``default`` statement are ill-formed. The compiler shall raise an error diagnostic for such cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Declarations or statements at ``switch`` statement scope but outside of a ``case`` statement are ill-formed. The compiler shall raise an error diagnostic for such cases.
```

A ``case`` or ``default`` statement may create brace-enclosed scope, if and only if such statements use the optional left and right brace literals.

> ``case`` statements may create scope by using both left and right braces, or shall not use braces at all, in which case no scope is created.
> 
> ``default`` statements may create scope by using both left and right braces, or shall not use braces at all, in which case no scope is created.
> 
> A ``break`` statement shall be followed by a semicolon literal (``;``). ``break`` statements not followed by a semicolon literal shall raise an error diagnostic.
> 
> A ``break`` statement followed by a semicolon terminates the ``case`` or ``default`` statement it belongs to.
> 
> Declarations at brace-enclosed ``case`` or ``default`` scope shall be in scope only within the scope of their brace enclosing ``case`` or ``default`` statements, regardless of whether the enclosing statement contains a terminating ``break`` statement or not.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Declarations of types that automatically acquire global scope in OpenQASM3 - such as gates, functions, arrays, qubits and defcals - are not allowed at ``case`` or ``default`` ``switch`` statement scope. Use of such declarations is ill-formed and requires a compiler diagnostic.

> Duplicate values for ``case`` statements controlling labels are not allowed. The compiler shall issue an error diagnostic in such cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Duplicate values within any ``integer-constant-list-expression`` for controlling labels of ``case`` statements are not allowed. The compiler shall issue an error diagnostic in such cases.
```

> A ``case`` or ``default`` statement ending with a ``break`` statement followed by a semicolon terminates the execution of the ``switch`` statement. After executing all the statements of the ``case`` or ``default`` statement, control is then transferred to the first statement following the closing right brace of the enclosing ``switch`` statement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A ``case`` or ``default`` statement ending with right-brace ``}`` terminates the execution of the ``switch`` statement. After executing all the statements of the ``case`` or ``default`` statement, control is then transferred to the first statement following the closing right brace of the enclosing ``switch`` statement.
```

> A ``case`` statement that does not contain a terminating ``break`` statement followed by a semicolon transfers control to the statement immediately following it.
> 
> A ``default`` statement that does not contain a terminating ``break`` statement followed by a semicolon transfers control outside the enclosing ``switch`` statement, to the first statement immediately following.
> 
> This is sometimes referred to as "fall-through".
> 
> The compiler shall issue a warning diagnostic for all fall-through ``case`` or ``default`` ``switch`` statements.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

A ``switch`` statement shall contain at least one ``case`` statement. A ``switch`` statement with no ``case`` statements shall raise an error diagnostic.

> A ``switch`` statement is not required to contain a ``default`` statement. If a ``default`` statement is absent, the compiler shall issue a warning diagnostic.

Reviewer 2: This makes sense if the controlling type is required to be an integer. If we decide to allow for bit arrays, then exhaustive cases would be more common and this could be dropped.

> A ``switch`` statement is not required to contain a ``default`` statement. If a ``default`` statement is absent, the compiler shall issue a warning diagnostic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A ``switch`` statement is not required to contain a ``default`` statement.
```

Examples:

1. A simple ``switch`` statement with ``case`` and ``default`` statements:

.. code-block::

	OPENQASM 3.0;

	int i = 15;

	switch (i) {

> 	case 1: {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	case 1, 3, 5 {
```

	  // OpenQASM3 statement(s)
	}

> 	  break;
> 	case 2: {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	case 2, 4, 6 {
```

	  // OpenQASM3 statement(s)
	}
	  break;
	case 3: {
	  // OpenQASM3 statement(s)
	}

> 	  break;
> 	case 5: {
> 	  // OpenQASM3 statement(s)
> 	}
> 	  break;
> 	case 12: {
> 	  // OpenQASM3 statement(s)
> 	}
> 	  break;
> 	default: {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	default {
```

	  // OpenQASM3 statement(s)
	}

> 	  break;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

	}
	

> 	

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

2. A switch statement with binary literals in the ``case`` statements:

.. code-block::

  OPENQASM 3.0;

  bit[2] b;
  switch (int(b)) {
  case 0b00 {
    // OpenQASM3 statement(s)
  }
  case 0b01 {
    // OpenQASM3 statement(s)
  }
  case 0b10 {
    // OpenQASM3 statement(s)
  }
  case 0b11 {
    // OpenQASM3 statement(s)
  }
  }
```

> 2. A ``switch`` statement containing declarations at ``case`` statement scope, and a function call, also at ``case`` statement scope:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. A ``switch`` statement containing declarations at ``case`` statement scope, and a function call, also at ``case`` statement scope:
```

.. code-block::

	OPENQASM 3.0;

	def foo(int i, qubit[8] d) -> bit {
	  return measure d[i];
	}

	int i = 15;

	int j = 1;
	int k = 2;

	bit c1;

> 	qubit[8] $0;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	qubit[8] q0;
```

> 	qubit $1;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

	switch (i) {

> 	case 1: {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	case 1 {
```

> 	  j = k + foo(k, $0);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	  j = k + foo(k, q0);
```

	}

> 	  break;
> 	case 2: {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	case 2 {
```

	  float[64] d = j / k;
	}

> 	  break;
> 	case 3: {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	case 3 {
```

	}

> 	  break;
> 	default: {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	default {
```

	}
	  break;
	}
	
	
3. A ``switch`` statement containing fall-through ``case`` statements.

.. code-block::

	OPENQASM 3.0;

	def foo(int i, qubit[8] d) -> bit {
	  return measure d[i];
	}

	int i = 15;

	int j = 1;
	int k = 2;

	float[64] d = 0.0;

	bit c1;

	qubit[8] $0;
	qubit $1;

	switch (i) {
	case 1: {
	  j = k + foo(k, $0);
	}
	  break;
	case 2:
	  d = j / k;
	  break;
	case 3:
	case 5:
	  c1 = foo(k, $0);
	  break;
	default:
	  break;
	}
	
	
4. A ``switch`` statement containing a nested ``switch`` statement.

.. code-block::

	OPENQASM 3.0;

	def foo(qubit[8] q) -> int {
	  int r = 0;
	  bit k;

	  for int i in [0 : 7] {
		k = measure q[i];
		r += k;
	  }

	  return r;
	}

> 	qubit[8] $0;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	qubit[8] q;
```

	int j = 30;

> 	int i = foo($0);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	int i = foo(q);
```

	switch (i) {

> 	case 1: {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	case 1, 2, 5, 12 {
```

	}
	  break;
	case 2: {
	}
	  break;
	case 3: {
	  switch (j) {

> 	  case 10: {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	  case 10, 15, 20 {
	  	  h q;	  
```

	  }

> 		break;
> 	  case 15: {
> 	  }
> 		break;
> 	  case 20: {
> 	  }
> 		break;
> 	  default: {
> 	  }
> 		break;
> 	  }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

	}

> 	  break;
> 	case 5: {
> 	}
> 	  break;
> 	case 12: {
> 	}
> 	  break;
> 	default: {
> 	}
> 	  break;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
